Selling Free Software
*********************

Some views on the ideas of selling exceptions to free software licenses,
such as the GNU GPL, are also available, at
<http://gnu.org/philosophy/selling-exceptions.html>.  This essay was
originally published on <http://gnu.org>, in 1996.

This document is part of GNU philosophy, the GNU Project's exhaustive
collection of articles and essays about free software and related
matters.

   Copyright (C) 1996, 1997, 1998, 2001, 2007 Free Software Foundation,
Inc.

     Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire document are
     permitted worldwide, without royalty, in any medium, provided this
     notice is preserved.

--- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---

Many people believe that the spirit of the GNU Project is that you
should not charge money for distributing copies of software, or that you
should charge as little as possible--just enough to cover the cost.
This is a misunderstanding.

   Actually, we encourage people who redistribute free software to
charge as much as they wish or can.  If this seems surprising to you,
please read on.

   The word "free" has two legitimate general meanings; it can refer
either to freedom or to price.  When we speak of "free software," we're
talking about freedom, not price.  (Think of "free speech," not "free
beer.")  Specifically, it means that a user is free to run the program,
change the program, and redistribute the program with or without
changes.

   Free programs are sometimes distributed gratis, and sometimes for a
substantial price.  Often the same program is available in both ways
from different places.  The program is free regardless of the price,
because users have freedom in using it.

   Nonfree programs are usually sold for a high price, but sometimes a
store will give you a copy at no charge.  That doesn't make it free
software, though.  Price or no price, the program is nonfree because
users don't have freedom.

   Since free software is not a matter of price, a low price doesn't
make the software free, or even closer to free.  So if you are
redistributing copies of free software, you might as well charge a
substantial fee and _make some money._  Redistributing free software is
a good and legitimate activity; if you do it, you might as well make a
profit from it.

   Free software is a community project, and everyone who depends on it
ought to look for ways to contribute to building the community.  For a
distributor, the way to do this is to give a part of the profit to free
software development projects or to the Free Software Foundation.  This
way you can advance the world of free software.

_Distributing free software is an opportunity to raise funds for
development.  Don't waste it!_

   In order to contribute funds, you need to have some extra.  If you
charge too low a fee, you won't have anything to spare to support
development.

Will a Higher Distribution Price Hurt Some Users?
-------------------------------------------------

People sometimes worry that a high distribution fee will put free
software out of range for users who don't have a lot of money.  With
proprietary software, a high price does exactly that--but free software
is different.

   The difference is that free software naturally tends to spread
around, and there are many ways to get it.

   Software hoarders try their damnedest to stop you from running a
proprietary program without paying the standard price.  If this price is
high, that does make it hard for some users to use the program.

   With free software, users don't _have_ to pay the distribution fee in
order to use the software.  They can copy the program from a friend who
has a copy, or with the help of a friend who has network access.  Or
several users can join together, split the price of one CD-ROM, then
each in turn can install the software.  A high CD-ROM price is not a
major obstacle when the software is free.

Will a Higher Distribution Price Discourage Use of Free Software?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Another common concern is for the popularity of free software.  People
think that a high price for distribution would reduce the number of
users, or that a low price is likely to encourage users.

   This is true for proprietary software--but free software is
different.  With so many ways to get copies, the price of distribution
service has less effect on popularity.

   In the long run, how many people use free software is determined
mainly by _how much free software can do,_ and how easy it is to use.
Many users do not make freedom their priority; they may continue to use
proprietary software if free software can't do all the jobs they want
done.  Thus, if we want to increase the number of users in the long run,
we should above all _develop more free software._

   The most direct way to do this is by writing needed free software or
manuals yourself.  But if you do distribution rather than writing, the
best way you can help is by raising funds for others to write them.

The Term "Selling Software" Can Be Confusing Too
------------------------------------------------

Strictly speaking, "selling" means trading goods for money.  Selling a
copy of a free program is legitimate, and we encourage it.

   However, when people think of "selling software," they usually
imagine doing it the way most companies do it: making the software
proprietary rather than free.

   So unless you're going to draw distinctions carefully, the way this
article does, we suggest it is better to avoid using the term "selling
software" and choose some other wording instead.  For example, you could
say "distributing free software for a fee"--that is unambiguous.

High or Low Fees, and the GNU GPL
---------------------------------

Except for one special situation, the GNU General Public License (GNU
GPL) has no requirements about how much you can charge for distributing
a copy of free software.  You can charge nothing, a penny, a dollar, or
a billion dollars.  It's up to you, and the marketplace, so don't
complain to us if nobody wants to pay a billion dollars for a copy.

   The one exception is in the case where binaries are distributed
without the corresponding complete source code.  Those who do this are
required by the GNU GPL to provide source code on subsequent request.
Without a limit on the fee for the source code, they would be able set a
fee too large for anyone to pay--such as a billion dollars--and thus
pretend to release source code while in truth concealing it.  So in this
case we have to limit the fee for source in order to ensure the user's
freedom.  In ordinary situations, however, there is no such
justification for limiting distribution fees, so we do not limit them.

   Sometimes companies whose activities cross the line stated in the GNU
GPL plead for permission, saying that they "won't charge money for the
GNU software" or such like.  That won't get them anywhere with us.  Free
software is about freedom, and enforcing the GPL is defending freedom.
When we defend users' freedom, we are not distracted by side issues such
as how much of a distribution fee is charged.  Freedom is the issue, the
whole issue, and the only issue.
