Why Open Source Misses the Point of Free Software
*************************************************

This essay was originally published on <http://gnu.org>, in 2007.

This document is part of GNU philosophy, the GNU Project's exhaustive
collection of articles and essays about free software and related
matters.

   Copyright (C) 2007, 2008, 2010 Richard Stallman

     Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire document are
     permitted worldwide, without royalty, in any medium, provided this
     notice is preserved.

--- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---

When we call software "free," we mean that it respects the users'
essential freedoms: the freedom to run it, to study and change it, and
to redistribute copies with or without changes.  This is a matter of
freedom, not price, so think of "free speech," not "free beer."

   These freedoms are vitally important.  They are essential, not just
for the individual users' sake, but for society as a whole because they
promote social solidarity--that is, sharing and cooperation.  They
become even more important as our culture and life activities are
increasingly digitized.  In a world of digital sounds, images, and
words, free software becomes increasingly essential for freedom in
general.

   Tens of millions of people around the world now use free software;
the public schools of some regions of India and Spain now teach all
students to use the free GNU/Linux operating system.  Most of these
users, however, have never heard of the ethical reasons for which we
developed this system and built the free software community, because
nowadays this system and community are more often spoken of as "open
source," attributing them to a different philosophy in which these
freedoms are hardly mentioned.

   The free software movement has campaigned for computer users' freedom
since 1983.  In 1984 we launched the development of the free operating
system GNU, so that we could avoid the nonfree operating systems that
deny freedom to their users.  During the 1980s, we developed most of the
essential components of the system and designed the GNU General Public
License (GNU GPL) to release them under--a license designed specifically
to protect freedom for all users of a program.

   Not all of the users and developers of free software agreed with the
goals of the free software movement.  In 1998, a part of the free
software community splintered off and began campaigning in the name of
"open source."  The term was originally proposed to avoid a possible
misunderstanding of the term "free software," but it soon became
associated with philosophical views quite different from those of the
free software movement.

   Some of the supporters of open source considered the term a
"marketing campaign for free software," which would appeal to business
executives by highlighting the software's practical benefits, while not
raising issues of right and wrong that they might not like to hear.
Other supporters flatly rejected the free software movement's ethical
and social values.  Whichever their views, when campaigning for open
source, they neither cited nor advocated those values.  The term "open
source" quickly became associated with ideas and arguments based only on
practical values, such as making or having powerful, reliable software.
Most of the supporters of open source have come to it since then, and
they make the same association.

   Nearly all open source software is free software.  The two terms
describe almost the same category of software, but they stand for views
based on fundamentally different values.  Open source is a development
methodology; free software is a social movement.  For the free software
movement, free software is an ethical imperative, because only free
software respects the users' freedom.  By contrast, the philosophy of
open source considers issues in terms of how to make software
"better"--in a practical sense only.  It says that nonfree software is
an inferior solution to the practical problem at hand.  For the free
software movement, however, nonfree software is a social problem, and
the solution is to stop using it and move to free software.

   "Free software."  "Open source."  If it's the same software, does it
matter which name you use?  Yes, because different words convey
different ideas.  While a free program by any other name would give you
the same freedom today, establishing freedom in a lasting way depends
above all on teaching people to value freedom.  If you want to help do
this, it is essential to speak of "free software."

   We in the free software movement don't think of the open source camp
as an enemy; the enemy is proprietary (nonfree) software.  But we want
people to know we stand for freedom, so we do not accept being
mislabeled as open source supporters.

Common Misunderstandings of "Free Software" and "Open Source"
-------------------------------------------------------------

The term "free software" is prone to misinterpretation: an unintended
meaning, "software you can get for zero price," fits the term just as
well as the intended meaning, "software which gives the user certain
freedoms."  We address this problem by publishing the definition of free
software, and by saying, "Think of 'free speech,' not 'free beer.'"
This is not a perfect solution; it cannot completely eliminate the
problem.  An unambiguous and correct term would be better, if it didn't
present other problems.

   Unfortunately, all the alternatives in English have problems of their
own.  We've looked at many that people have suggested, but none is so
clearly "right" that switching to it would be a good idea.  (For
instance, in some contexts the French and Spanish word "libre" works
well, but people in India do not recognize it at all.)  Every proposed
replacement for "free software" has some kind of semantic problem--and
this includes "open source software."

   The official definition of "open source software"(1) (which is
published by the Open Source Initiative and is too long to include here)
was derived indirectly from our criteria for free software.  It is not
the same; it is a little looser in some respects, so the open source
people have accepted a few licenses that we consider unacceptably
restrictive.  Also, they judge solely by the license of the source code,
whereas our criterion also considers whether a device will let you _run_
your modified version of the program.  Nonetheless, their definition
agrees with our definition in most cases.

   However, the obvious meaning for the expression "open source
software"--and the one most people seem to think it means--is "You can
look at the source code."  That criterion is much weaker than the free
software definition, much weaker also than the official definition of
open source.  It includes many programs that are neither free nor open
source.

   Since that obvious meaning for "open source" is not the meaning that
its advocates intend, the result is that most people misunderstand the
term.  According to writer Neal Stephenson, "Linux is 'open source'
software, meaning simply, anyone can get copies of its source code
files."(2)  I don't think he deliberately sought to reject or dispute
the "official" definition.  I think he simply applied the conventions of
the English language to come up with a meaning for the term.  The state
of Kansas published a similar definition: "Make use of open-source
software (OSS). OSS is software for which the source code is freely and
publicly available, though the specific licensing agreements vary as to
what one is allowed to do with that code."

   The 'New York Times' has run an article that stretches the meaning of
the term to refer to user beta testing(3)--letting a few users try an
early version and give confidential feedback--which proprietary software
developers have practiced for decades.

   Open source supporters try to deal with this by pointing to their
official definition, but that corrective approach is less effective for
them than it is for us.  The term "free software" has two natural
meanings, one of which is the intended meaning, so a person who has
grasped the idea of "free speech, not free beer" will not get it wrong
again.  But the term "open source" has only one natural meaning, which
is different from the meaning its supporters intend.  So there is no
succinct way to explain and justify its official definition.  That makes
for worse confusion.

   Another misunderstanding of "open source" is the idea that it means
"not using the GNU GPL."  This tends to accompany another
misunderstanding that "free software" means "GPL-covered software."
These are both mistaken, since the GNU GPL qualifies as an open source
license and most of the open source licenses qualify as free software
licenses.

   The term "open source" has been further stretched by its application
to other activities, such as government, education, and science, where
there is no such thing as source code, and where criteria for software
licensing are simply not pertinent.  The only thing these activities
have in common is that they somehow invite people to participate.  They
stretch the term so far that it only means "participatory."

Different Values Can Lead to Similar Conclusions... but Not Always
------------------------------------------------------------------

Radical groups in the 1960s had a reputation for factionalism: some
organizations split because of disagreements on details of strategy, and
the two daughter groups treated each other as enemies despite having
similar basic goals and values.  The right wing made much of this and
used it to criticize the entire left.

   Some try to disparage the free software movement by comparing our
disagreement with open source to the disagreements of those radical
groups.  They have it backwards.  We disagree with the open source camp
on the basic goals and values, but their views and ours lead in many
cases to the same practical behavior--such as developing free software.

   As a result, people from the free software movement and the open
source camp often work together on practical projects such as software
development.  It is remarkable that such different philosophical views
can so often motivate different people to participate in the same
projects.  Nonetheless, there are situations where these fundamentally
different views lead to very different actions.

   The idea of open source is that allowing users to change and
redistribute the software will make it more powerful and reliable.  But
this is not guaranteed.  Developers of proprietary software are not
necessarily incompetent.  Sometimes they produce a program that is
powerful and reliable, even though it does not respect the users'
freedom.  Free software activists and open source enthusiasts will react
very differently to that.

   A pure open source enthusiast, one that is not at all influenced by
the ideals of free software, will say, "I am surprised you were able to
make the program work so well without using our development model, but
you did.  How can I get a copy?"  This attitude will reward schemes that
take away our freedom, leading to its loss.

   The free software activist will say, "Your program is very
attractive, but I value my freedom more.  So I reject your program.
Instead I will support a project to develop a free replacement."  If we
value our freedom, we can act to maintain and defend it.

Powerful, Reliable Software Can Be Bad
--------------------------------------

The idea that we want software to be powerful and reliable comes from
the supposition that the software is designed to serve its users.  If it
is powerful and reliable, that means it serves them better.

   But software can be said to serve its users only if it respects their
freedom.  What if the software is designed to put chains on its users?
Then powerfulness means the chains are more constricting, and
reliability that they are harder to remove.  Malicious features, such as
spying on the users, restricting the users, back doors, and imposed
upgrades are common in proprietary software, and some open source
supporters want to implement them in open source programs.

   Under pressure from the movie and record companies, software for
individuals to use is increasingly designed specifically to restrict
them.  This malicious feature is known as Digital Restrictions
Management (DRM) (see <http://defectivebydesign.org>) and is the
antithesis in spirit of the freedom that free software aims to provide.
And not just in spirit: since the goal of DRM is to trample your
freedom, DRM developers try to make it hard, impossible, or even illegal
for you to change the software that implements the DRM.

   Yet some open source supporters have proposed "open source DRM"
software.  Their idea is that, by publishing the source code of programs
designed to restrict your access to encrypted media and by allowing
others to change it, they will produce more powerful and reliable
software for restricting users like you.  The software would then be
delivered to you in devices that do not allow you to change it.

   This software might be open source and use the open source
development model, but it won't be free software since it won't respect
the freedom of the users that actually run it.  If the open source
development model succeeds in making this software more powerful and
reliable for restricting you, that will make it even worse.

Fear of Freedom
---------------

The main initial motivation of those who split off the open source camp
from the free software movement was that the ethical ideas of "free
software" made some people uneasy.  That's true: raising ethical issues
such as freedom, talking about responsibilities as well as convenience,
is asking people to think about things they might prefer to ignore, such
as whether their conduct is ethical.  This can trigger discomfort, and
some people may simply close their minds to it.  It does not follow that
we ought to stop talking about these issues.

   That is, however, what the leaders of open source decided to do.
They figured that by keeping quiet about ethics and freedom, and talking
only about the immediate practical benefits of certain free software,
they might be able to "sell" the software more effectively to certain
users, especially business.

   This approach has proved effective, in its own terms.  The rhetoric
of open source has convinced many businesses and individuals to use, and
even develop, free software, which has extended our community--but only
at the superficial, practical level.  The philosophy of open source,
with its purely practical values, impedes understanding of the deeper
ideas of free software; it brings many people into our community, but
does not teach them to defend it.  That is good, as far as it goes, but
it is not enough to make freedom secure.  Attracting users to free
software takes them just part of the way to becoming defenders of their
own freedom.

   Sooner or later these users will be invited to switch back to
proprietary software for some practical advantage.  Countless companies
seek to offer such temptation, some even offering copies gratis.  Why
would users decline?  Only if they have learned to value the freedom
free software gives them, to value freedom in and of itself rather than
the technical and practical convenience of specific free software.  To
spread this idea, we have to talk about freedom.  A certain amount of
the "keep quiet" approach to business can be useful for the community,
but it is dangerous if it becomes so common that the love of freedom
comes to seem like an eccentricity.

   That dangerous situation is exactly what we have.  Most people
involved with free software, especially its distributors, say little
about freedom--usually because they seek to be "more acceptable to
business."  Nearly all GNU/Linux operating system distributions add
proprietary packages to the basic free system, and they invite users to
consider this an advantage rather than a flaw.

   Proprietary add-on software and partially nonfree GNU/Linux
distributions find fertile ground because most of our community does not
insist on freedom with its software.  This is no coincidence.  Most
GNU/Linux users were introduced to the system through "open source"
discussion, which doesn't say that freedom is a goal.  The practices
that don't uphold freedom and the words that don't talk about freedom go
hand in hand, each promoting the other.  To overcome this tendency, we
need more, not less, talk about freedom.

Conclusion
----------

As the advocates of open source draw new users into our community, we
free software activists must shoulder the task of bringing the issue of
freedom to their attention.  We have to say, "It's free software and it
gives you freedom!"--more and louder than ever.  Every time you say
"free software" rather than "open source," you help our campaign.

Notes
-----

   * Joe Barr's article "Live and Let License" (ITworld.com,
     22 May 2001, <http://www.itworld.com/LWD010523vcontrol4>) gives his
     perspective on this issue.
   * Karim R. Lakhani and Robert G. Wolf's paper on the motivation of
     free software developers ("Why Hackers Do What They Do:
     Understanding Motivation and Effort in Free/Open Source Software
     Projects," in 'Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software,'
     edited by J. Feller and others (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005)) says
     that a considerable fraction are motivated by the view that
     software should be free.  This is despite the fact that they
     surveyed the developers on SourceForge, a site that does not
     support the view that this is an ethical issue.

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) See <http://opensource.org/docs/osd> for the full definition.

   (2) Neal Stephenson, 'In the Beginning...Was the Command Line' (New
York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1999), p. 94.

   (3) Mary Jane Irwin, "The Brave New World of Open-Source Game
Design," 'New York Times,' online ed., 7 February 2009,
<http://www.nytimes.com/external/gigaom/2009/02/07/07gigaom-the-brave-new-world-of-open-source-game-design-37415.html>.

